# Android Coding Standard

## Contents

[1. Project Guidelines] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#1-project-guidelines)

  [1.1 Project structure] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#11-project-structure)

[1.2 Source file structure] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#12-source-file-structure)

[1.3 File naming] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#13-file-naming)

[1.4 gitignore] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#14-gitignore)

[2. Code Guidelines] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#2-code-guidelines)

[2.1 Java language rules] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#21-java-language-rules)

[2.2 Java styles rules] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#22-java-styles-rules)

[2.3 XML style rule] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#23-xml-style-rule)

[2.4 Test style rules] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#24-test-style-rules)

[3. Being consistent] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#3-being-consistent)

[4. Best practices:] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#4-best-practices)

[4.1 Storing sensitive data on a local file and not pushing in a git repo] ()

[4.2 MVP Architecture] ()

[5. Sources] (https://github.com/leapfrogtechnology/android-guidelines#5-sources)

## 1. Project Guidelines
### 1.1 Project structure: 
By default, Android Studio displays your project files in the Android view. This view does not reflect the actual file hierarchy on disk, but is organized by modules and file types to simplify navigation between key source files of your project, hiding certain files or directories that are not commonly used. Some of the structural changes compared to the structure on disk include the following:
* Shows all the project's build-related configuration files in a top-level Gradle Script group.
* Shows all manifest files for each module in a module-level group (when you have different manifest files for different product flavors and build types).
* Shows all alternative resource files in a single group, instead of in separate folders per resource qualifier. For example, all density versions of your launcher icon are visible side-by-side.

Within each Android app module, files are shown in the following groups:
- manifests : Contains the AndroidManifest.xml file.
- java : Contains the Java source code files, separated by package names, including JUnit test code.
- res : Contains all non-code resources, such as XML layouts, UI strings, and bitmap images, divided into corresponding sub-directories.

#### The Android Project View
To see the actual file structure of the project including all files hidden from the Android view, select Project from the dropdown at the top of the Project window.
When you select Project view, you can see a lot more files and directories. The most important of which are the following:

    module-name/
    
        build/          Contains build outputs.
        
        libs/           Contains private libraries.
        
        src/            Contains all code and resource files for the module in the following subdirectories:
        
            androidTest/    Contains code for instrumentation tests that run on an Android device. For more information, see the Android Test documentation.
            
            main/           Contains the "main" sourceset files: the Android code and resources shared by all build variants (files for other build variants reside in sibling directories, such as src/debug/ for the debug build type).
            
                AndroidManifest.xml Describes the nature of the application and each of its components. For more information, see the AndroidManifest.xmldocumentation.
                
                java/              Contains Java code sources.
                
                jni/               Contains native code using the Java Native Interface (JNI). For more information, see the Android NDK documentation.
                
                gen/                Contains the Java files generated by Android Studio, such as your R.java file and interfaces created from AIDL files.
                
                res/                Contains application resources, such as drawable files, layout files, and UI string. See Application Resources for more information.
                
                assets/             Contains file that should be compiled into an .apk file as-is. You can navigate this directory in the same way as a typical file system using URIs and read files as a stream of bytes using the AssetManager. For example, this is a good location for textures and game data.
                
            test/           Contains code for local tests that run on your host JVM.
            
            build.gradle (module)   This defines the module-specific build configurations.
            
        build.gradle (project)  This defines your build configuration that apply to all modules. This file is integral to the project, so you should maintain them in revision control with all other source code.

For information about other build files, see [Configure Your Build] (https://developer.android.com/studio/build/index.html).
### 1.2 Source file structure

A source file consists of, in order:

* License or copyright information, if present
* Package statement
* Import statements
* Exactly one top-level class
* Exactly one blank line separates each section that is present.

#### 1.2.1 License or copyright information, if present

If license or copyright information belongs in a file, it belongs here.

#### 1.2.1 Package statement

The package statement is not line-wrapped. The column limit (Column limit: 100) does not apply to package statements.

#### 1.2.3 Import statements

##### 1.2.3.1 No wildcard imports

Wildcard imports, static or otherwise, are not used.

Don't use

java.io.*

Use

java.io.File

##### 1.2.3.2 No line-wrapping

Import statements are not line-wrapped. The column limit (Column limit: 100) does not apply to import statements.

##### 1.2.3.3 Ordering and spacing

Imports are ordered as follows:

* All static imports in a single block.
* All non-static imports in a single block.
* If there are both static and non-static imports, a single blank line separates the two blocks. There are no other blank lines between import statements.

Within each block the imported names appear in ASCII sort order. (Note: this is not the same as the import statements being in ASCII sort order, since '.' sorts before ';'.)

#### 1.3.4 Class declaration

##### 1.3.4.1 Exactly one top-level class declaration

Each top-level class resides in a source file of its own.

##### 1.3.4.2 Class member ordering

The ordering of the members of a class can have a great effect on learnability, but there is no single correct recipe for how to do it but using a logical and consistent order will improve code learnability and readability. It is recommendable to use the following order:


1. Constants
2. Fields
3. Constructors
4. Override methods and callbacks (public or private)
5. Public methods
6. Private methods
7. Inner classes or interfaces

If your class is extending an __Android component__ such as an Activity or a Fragment, it is a good practice to order the override methods so that they __match the component's lifecycle__. For example, if you have an Activity that implements `onCreate()`, `onDestroy()`, `onPause()` and `onResume()`, then the correct order is:

```java
public class MainActivity extends Activity {

	//Order matches Activity lifecycle
    @Override
    public void onCreate() {}

    @Override
    public void onResume() {}

    @Override
    public void onPause() {}

    @Override
    public void onDestroy() {}

}
```

###### 1.3.4.2.1 Overloads: never split

When a class has multiple constructors, or multiple methods with the same name, these appear sequentially, with no intervening members (not even private ones).

### 1.3 File naming
#### 1.3.1 Class files

Class names are written in UpperCamelCase.

For classes that extend an Android component, the name of the class should end with the name of the component; for example: `SignInActivity`, `SignInFragment`, `ImageUploaderService`, `ChangePasswordDialog`.
#### 1.3.2 Resource files
Resources file names are written in __lowercase_underscore__.

#### 1.3.2.1 Drawable files

Naming conventions for drawables:

| Asset Type   | Prefix            |    Example               |
|--------------| ------------------|-----------------------------|
| Action bar   | `ab_`             | `ab_stacked.9.png`          |
| Button       | `btn_`             | `btn_send_pressed.9.png`    |
| Dialog       | `dialog_`         | `dialog_top.9.png`          |
| Divider      | `divider_`        | `divider_horizontal.9.png`  |
| Icon         | `ic_`              | `ic_star.png`               |
| Menu         | `menu_ `           | `menu_submenu_bg.9.png`     |
| Notification | `notification_`  | `notification_bg.9.png`     |
| Tabs         | `tab_`            | `tab_pressed.9.png`         |

Naming conventions for icons (taken from [Android iconography guidelines](http://developer.android.com/design/style/iconography.html)):

| Asset Type                      | Prefix             | Example                      |
| --------------------------------| ----------------   | ---------------------------- |
| Icons                           | `ic_`              | `ic_star.png`                |
| Launcher icons                  | `ic_launcher`      | `ic_launcher_calendar.png`   |
| Menu icons and Action Bar icons | `ic_menu`          | `ic_menu_archive.png`        |
| Status bar icons                | `ic_stat_notify`   | `ic_stat_notify_msg.png`     |
| Tab icons                       | `ic_tab`           | `ic_tab_recent.png`          |
| Dialog icons                    | `ic_dialog`        | `ic_dialog_info.png`         |

Naming conventions for selector states:

| State        | Suffix          | Example                     |
|--------------|-----------------|-----------------------------|
| Normal       | `_normal`       | `btn_order_normal.9.png`    |
| Pressed      | `_pressed`      | `btn_order_pressed.9.png`   |
| Focused      | `_focused`      | `btn_order_focused.9.png`   |
| Disabled     | `_disabled`     | `btn_order_disabled.9.png`  |
| Selected     | `_selected`     | `btn_order_selected.9.png`  |


#### 1.3.2.2 Layout files

Layout files should match the name of the Android components that they are intended for but moving the top level component name to the beginning. For example, if we are creating a layout for the `SignInActivity`, the name of the layout file should be `activity_sign_in.xml`.

| Component        | Class Name             | Layout Name                   |
| ---------------- | ---------------------- | ----------------------------- |
| Activity         | `UserProfileActivity`  | `activity_user_profile.xml`   |
| Fragment         | `SignUpFragment`       | `fragment_sign_up.xml`        |
| Dialog           | `ChangePasswordDialog` | `dialog_change_password.xml`  |
| AdapterView item | ---                    | `item_person.xml`             |
| Partial layout   | ---                    | `partial_stats_bar.xml`       |

A slightly different case is when we are creating a layout that is going to be inflated by an `Adapter`, e.g to populate a `ListView`. In this case, the name of the layout should start with `item_`.

Note that there are cases where these rules will not be possible to apply. For example, when creating layout files that are intended to be part of other layouts. In this case you should use the prefix `partial_`.

#### 1.3.2.3 Menu files

Similar to layout files, menu files should match the name of the component. For example, if we are defining a menu file that is going to be used in the `UserActivity`, then the name of the file should be `activity_user.xml`

A good practice is to not include the word `menu` as part of the name because these files are already located in the `menu` directory.

#### 1.3.2.4 Values files

Resource files in the values folder should be __plural__, e.g. `strings.xml`, `styles.xml`, `colors.xml`, `dimens.xml`, `attrs.xml`
### 1.4 gitignore

A reference on `.gitignore` file used in our projects can be found [here](https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/master/Android.gitignore). The file is based on the guidelines provided in [Github's gitignore template](https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/master/Android.gitignore).

[Here] (https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/master/Android.gitignore) is a sample of gitignore file.

## 2. Code Guidelines
### 2.1 Java language rules
#### 2.1.1. Exceptions
##### 2.1.1.1 Don’t ignore exceptions
Avoid not handling exceptions in the correct manner. For example:

	public void setUserId(String id) {
    	try {
        	mUserId = Integer.parseInt(id);
    	} catch (NumberFormatException e) { }
	}

This gives no information to both the developer and the user, making it harder to debug and could also leave the user confused if something goes wrong. When catching an exception, we should also always log the error to the console for debugging purposes and if necessary alert the user of the issue. For example:

	public void setCount(String count) {
    	try {
        	count = Integer.parseInt(id);
    	} catch (NumberFormatException e) {
    		count = 0;
        	Log.e(TAG, "There was an error parsing the count " + e);
        	DialogFactory.showErrorMessage(R.string.error_message_parsing_count);
    	}
	}

Here we handle the error appropriately by:

- Showing a message to the user notifying them that there has been an error
- Setting a default value for the variable if possible
- Throw an appropriate exception

##### 2.1.1.2 Don’t catch generic exception

Catching exceptions generally should not be done:

	public void openCustomTab(Context context, Uri uri) {
    	Intent intent = buildIntent(context, uri);
    	try {
        	context.startActivity(intent);
    	} catch (Exception e) {
        	Log.e(TAG, "There was an error opening the custom tab " + e);
    	}
	}

Why?

*Do not do this. In almost all cases it is inappropriate to catch generic Exception or Throwable (preferably not Throwable because it includes Error exceptions). It is very dangerous because it means that Exceptions you never expected (including RuntimeExceptions like ClassCastException) get caught in application-level error handling. It obscures the failure handling properties of your code, meaning if someone adds a new type of Exception in the code you're calling, the compiler won't help you realize you need to handle the error differently. In most cases you shouldn't be handling different types of exception the same way.* - taken from the Android Code Style Guidelines

Instead, catch the expected exception and handle it accordingly:

    public void openCustomTab(Context context, Uri uri) {
      Intent intent = buildIntent(context, uri);
      try {
          context.startActivity(intent);
      } catch (ActivityNotFoundException e) {
          Log.e(TAG, "There was an error opening the custom tab " + e);
      }
    }

##### 2.1.1.3 Grouping Exceptions

Where exceptions execute the same code, they should be grouped in-order to increase readability and avoid code duplication. For example, where you may do this:

    public void openCustomTab(Context context, @Nullable Uri uri) {
      Intent intent = buildIntent(context, uri);
      try {
          context.startActivity(intent);
      } catch (ActivityNotFoundException e) {
          Log.e(TAG, "There was an error opening the custom tab " + e);
      } catch (NullPointerException e) {
          Log.e(TAG, "There was an error opening the custom tab " + e);
      } catch (SomeOtherException e) {
        // Show some dialog
        }
    }

You could do this:

    public void openCustomTab(Context context, @Nullable Uri uri) {
      Intent intent = buildIntent(context, uri);
      try {
          context.startActivity(intent);
      } catch (ActivityNotFoundException e | NullPointerException e) {
          Log.e(TAG, "There was an error opening the custom tab " + e);
      } catch (SomeOtherException e) {
        // Show some dialog
        }
    }

##### 2.1.1.4 Using try-catch over throw exception

Using try-catch statements improves the readability of the code where the exception is taking place. This is because the error is handled where it occurs, making it easier to both debug or make a change to how the error is handled.

##### 2.1.1.5 Don’t use finalizers

Finalizers are a way to have a chunk of code executed when an object is garbage collected. While they can be handy for doing cleanup (particularly of external resources), there are no guarantees as to when a finalizer will be called (or even that it will be called at all).

Android doesn't use finalizers. In most cases, you can do what you need from a finalizer with good exception handling. If you absolutely need it, define a close() method (or the like) and document exactly when that method needs to be called (see InputStream for an example). In this case it is appropriate but not required to print a short log message from the finalizer, as long as it is not expected to flood the logs.

#### 2.1.2 Fully qualify imports

When you want to use class Bar from package foo,there are two possible ways to import it:

    import foo.*;

Potentially reduces the number of import statements.

    import foo.Bar;

Makes it obvious what classes are actually used and the code is more readable for maintainers.

Use import foo.Bar; for importing all Android code. An explicit exception is made for java standard libraries (java.util.\*, java.io.\*, etc.) and unit test code (junit.framework.\*).

#### 2.1.3 Don’t keep unused imports

Sometimes removing code from a class can mean that some imports are no longer needed. If this is the case then the corresponding imports should be removed alongside the code.

### 2.2 Java styles rules

#### 2.2.1 Fields definition and naming

All fields should be declared at the top of the file, following these rules:

- Private, non-static field names should not start with m. This is right:
  
  `userSignedIn`, `userNameText`, `acceptButton`

Not this:

  `mUserSignedIn`, `mUserNameText`, `mAcceptButton`

Private, static field names do not need to start with an s. This is right:

  `someStaticField`, `userNameText`

Not this:
  `sSomeStaticField`, `sUserNameText`

- All other fields also start with a lower case letter.
    
      int numOfChildren;
      String username;

- Static final fields (known as constants) are ALL_CAPS_WITH_UNDERSCORES.

      private static final int PAGE_COUNT = 0;

Field names that do not reveal intention should not be used. For example,

    int e; //number of elements in the list

why not just give the field a meaningful name in the first place, rather than leaving a comment!

    int numberOfElements;

That's much better!

##### 2.2.1.2 View Field Naming

When naming fields that reference views, the name of the view should be the last word in the name. For example:

| View           | Name              |
|----------------|-------------------|
| TextView       | usernameView      |
| Button         | acceptLoginView   |
| ImageView      | profileAvatarView |
| RelativeLayout | profileLayout     |

We name views in this way so that we can easily identify what the field corresponds to. For example, having a field named **user** is extremely ambiguous - giving it the name usernameView, userAvatarView or userProfieLayout helps to make it clear  exactly what view the field corresponds with.

Previously, the names for views often ended in the view type (e.g acceptLoginButton) but quite often views change and it's easy to forgot to go back to java classes and update variable names.

#### 2.2.2 Avoid naming with container types

Leading on from the above, we should also avoid the use of container type names when creating variables for collections. For example, say we have an arraylist containing a list of userIds:

Do:

    List<String> userIds = new ArrayList<>();

Don't:

    List<String> userIdList = new ArrayList<>();

If and when container names change in the future, the naming of these can often get forgotten about - and just like view naming, it's not entirely necessary. Correct naming of the container itself should provide enough information for what it is.

#### 2.2.3 Avoid similar naming

Naming variables, method and / or classes with similar names can make it confusing for other developers reading over your code. For example:

    hasUserSelectedSingleProfilePreviously

    hasUserSelectedSignedProfilePreviously

Distinguishing the difference between these at a first glance can be hard to understand what is what. Naming these in a clearer way can make it easier for developers to navigate the fields in your code.

#### 2.2.4 Number series naming

When Android Studio auto-generates code for us, it's easy to leave things as they are - even when it generate horribly named parameters! For example, this isn't very nice:

    public void doSomething(String s1, String s2, String s3)

It's hard to understand what these parameters do without reading the code. Instead:

    public void doSomething(String userName, String userEmail, String userId)

That makes it much easier to understand! Now we'll be able to read the code following the parameter with a much clearer understanding 🙂

#### 2.2.5 Pronounceable names

When naming fields, methods and classes they should:

- Be readable: Efficient naming means we'll be able to look at the name and understand it instantly, reducing cognitive load on trying to decipher what the name means.

- Be speakable: Names that are speakable avoids awkward conversations where you're trying to pronounce a badly named variable name.

- Be searchable: Nothing is worse than trying to search for a method or variable in a class to realise it's been spelt wrong or badly named. If we're trying to find a method that searches for a user, then searching for 'search' should bring up a result for that method.

- Not use Hungarian notation: Hungarian notation goes against the three points made above, so it should never be used!

#### 2.2.6 Treat acronyms as words

Any acronyms for class names, variable names etc should be treated as words - this applies for any capitalisation used for any of the letters. For example:

| Do              | Don't           |
|-----------------|-----------------|
| setUserId       | setUserID       |
| String uri      | String URI      |
| int id          | int ID          |
| parseHtml       | parseHTML       |
| generateXmlFile | generateXMLFile |

#### 2.2.7 Avoid justifying variable declarations

Any declaration of variables should not use any special form of alignment, for example:

This is fine:

    private int userId = 8;
    private int count = 0;
    private String username = "hitherejoe";

Avoid doing this:

    private String username = "hitherejoe";
    private int userId      = 8;
    private int count       = 0;

This creates a stream of whitespace which is known to make text difficult to read for certain learning difficulties.

#### 2.2.8 Use spaces for indentation

For blocks, 4 space indentation should be used:

    if (userSignedIn) {
        count = 1;
    }

Whereas for line wraps, 8 spaces should be used:

    String userAboutText =
            "This is some text about the user and it is pretty long, can you see!"

#### 2.2.9 If-statements

##### 2.2.9.1 Use standard brace style

Braces should always be used on the same line as the code before them. For example, avoid doing this:


    class SomeClass
    {
      private void someFunction()
      {
          if (isSomething)
          {

          }
          else if (!isSomethingElse)
          {

          }
          else
          {

          }
      }
    }

And instead, do this:

    class SomeClass {
      private void someFunction() {
          if (isSomething) {

          } else if (!isSomethingElse) {

          } else {

          }
      }
    }

Not only is the extra line for the space not really necessary, but it makes blocks easier to follow when reading the code.

##### 2.2.9.2 Inline if-clauses

Sometimes it makes sense to use a single line for if statements. For example:

    if (user == null) return false;

However, it only works for simple operations. Something like this would be better suited with braces:

    if (user == null) throw new IllegalArgumentExeption("Oops, user object is required.");

##### 2.2.9.3 Nested if-conditions

Where possible, if-conditions should be combined to avoid over-complicated nesting. For example:

Do:

    if (userSignedIn && userId != null) {

    }

Try to avoid:

    if (userSignedIn) {
        if (userId != null) {

        }
    }

This makes statements easier to read and removes the unnecessary extra lines from the nested clauses.

##### 2.2.9.4 Ternary Operators

Where appropriate, ternary operators can be used to simplify operations.

For example, this is easy to read:

    userStatusImage = signedIn ? R.drawable.ic_tick : R.drawable.ic_cross;

and takes up far fewer lines of code than this:

    if (signedIn) {
        userStatusImage = R.drawable.ic_tick;
    } else {
        userStatusImage = R.drawable.ic_cross;
    }

**Note:** There are some times when ternary operators should not be used. If the if-clause logic is complex or a large number of characters then a standard brace style should be used.

#### 2.2.10 Annotations

##### 2.2.10.1 Annotation practices

Taken from  the Android code style guide:

**@Override:** The @Override annotation must be used whenever a method overrides the declaration or implementation from a super-class. For example, if you use the @inheritdocs Javadoc tag, and derive from a class (not an interface), you must also annotate that the method @Overrides the parent class's method.

**@SuppressWarnings:** The @SuppressWarnings annotation should only be used under circumstances where it is impossible to eliminate a warning. If a warning passes this "impossible to eliminate" test, the @SuppressWarnings annotation must be used, so as to ensure that all warnings reflect actual problems in the code.

Annotations should always be used where possible. For example, using the @Nullable annotation should be used in cases where a field could be expected as null. For example:

    @Nullable TextView userNameText;

    private void getName(@Nullable String name) { }

##### 2.2.10.2 Annotation style

Annotations that are applied to a method or class should always be defined in the declaration, with only one per line:

    @Annotation
    @AnotherAnnotation
    public class SomeClass {

      @SomeAnotation
      public String getMeAString() {

      }

    }

When using the annotations on fields, you should ensure that the annotation remains on the same line whilst there is room. For example:

    @Bind(R.id.layout_coordinator) CoordinatorLayout coordinatorLayout;

    @Inject MainPresenter mainPresenter;

We do this as it makes the statement easier to read. For example, the statement '@Inject SomeComponent mSomeName' reads as 'inject this component with this name'.

#### 2.2.11 Limit variable scope

The scope of local variables should be kept to a minimum (Effective Java Item 29). By doing so, you increase the readability and maintainability of your code and reduce the likelihood of error. Each variable should be declared in the innermost block that encloses all uses of the variable.

Local variables should be declared at the point they are first used. Nearly every local variable declaration should contain an initializer. If you don't yet have enough information to initialize a variable sensibly, you should postpone the declaration until you do. - taken from the Android code style guidelines

#### 2.2.12 Order import statements

Because we use Android Studio, so imports should always be ordered automatically. However, in the case that they may not be, then they should be ordered as follows:

1. Android imports
2. Imports from third parties
3. java and javax imports
4. Imports from the current Project

**Note:**

- Imports should be alphabetically ordered within each grouping, with capital letters before lower case letters (e.g. Z before a)
- There should be a blank line between each major grouping (android, com, JUnit, net, org, java, javax)

#### 2.2.13 Logging guidelines

Logging should be used to log useful error messages and/or other information that may be useful during development.


| Log                               | Reason      |
|-----------------------------------|-------------|
| Log.v(String tag, String message) | verbose     |
| Log.d(String tag, String message) | debug       |
| Log.i(String tag, String message) | information |
| Log.w(String tag, String message) | warning     |
| Log.e(String tag, String message) | error       |


We can set the `Tag` for the log as a `static final` field at the top of the class, for example:


    private static final String TAG = MyActivity.class.getName();

All verbose and debug logs must be disabled on release builds. On the other hand - information, warning and error logs should only be kept enabled if deemed necessary.


    if (BuildConfig.DEBUG) {
        Log.d(TAG, "Here's a log message");
    }

**Note:** Timber is the preferred logging method to be used. It handles the tagging for us, which saves us keeping a reference to a TAG.

#### 2.2.14 Field Ordering

Any fields declared at the top of a class file should be ordered in the following order:

1. Enums
2. Constants
3. Dagger Injected fields
4. Butterknife View Bindings
5. private global variables
6. public global variables

For example:

    public static enum {
      ENUM_ONE, ENUM_TWO
    }

    public static final String KEY_NAME = "KEY_NAME";
    public static final int COUNT_USER = 0;

    @Inject SomeAdapter someAdapter;

    @BindView(R.id.text_name) TextView nameText;
    @BindView(R.id.image_photo) ImageView photoImage;

    private int userCount;
    private String errorMessage;

    public int someCount;
    public String someString;

Using this ordering convention helps to keep field declarations grouped, which increases both the locating of and readability of said fields.

#### 2.2.15 Class member ordering

To improve code readability, it’s important to organise class members in a logical manner. The following order should be used to achieve this:


1. Constants
2. Fields
3. Constructors
4. Override methods and callbacks (public or private)
5. Public methods
6. Private methods
7. Inner classes or interfaces

For example:


    public class MainActivity extends Activity {

        private int count;

        public static newInstance() { }

        @Override
        public void onCreate() { }

        public setUsername() { }

        private void setupUsername() { }

        static class AnInnerClass { }

        interface SomeInterface { }

    }

Any lifecycle methods used in Android framework classes should be ordered in the corresponding lifecycle order. For example:


    public class MainActivity extends Activity {

        // Field and constructors

        @Override
        public void onCreate() { }

        @Override
        public void onStart() { }

        @Override
        public void onResume() { }

        @Override
        public void onPause() { }

        @Override
        public void onStop() { }

        @Override
        public void onRestart() { }

        @Override
        public void onDestroy() { }

        // public methods, private methods, inner classes and interfaces

    }
    
#### 2.2.16 Method parameter ordering

When defining methods, parameters should be ordered to the following convention:

    public Post loadPost(Context context, int postId);


    public void loadPost(Context context, int postId, Callback callback);

**Context** parameters always go first and **Callback** parameters always go last.

#### 2.2.17 String constants, naming and values

When using string constants, they should be declared as final static and use the follow conventions:

[Strings table]

#### 2.2.18 Enums

Enums should only be used where actually required. If another method is possible, then that should be the preferred way of approaching the implementation. For example:

Instead of this:


    public enum SomeEnum {
        ONE, TWO, THREE
    }

Do this:

    private static final int VALUE_ONE = 1;
    private static final int VALUE_TWO = 2;
    private static final int VALUE_THREE = 3;
    
#### 2.2.19 Arguments in fragments and activities

When we pass data using an Intent or Bundle, the keys for the values must use the conventions defined below:

**Activity**

Passing data to an activity must be done using a reference to a KEY, as defined as below:


    private static final String KEY_NAME = "com.your.package.name.to.activity.KEY_NAME";

**Fragment**

Passing data to a fragment must be done using a reference to an EXTRA, as defined as below:


    private static final String EXTRA_NAME = "EXTRA_NAME";

When creating new instances of a fragment or activity that involves passing data, we should provide a static method to retrieve the new instance, passing the data as method parameters. For example:

**Activity**

    public static Intent getStartIntent(Context context, Post post) {
        Intent intent = new Intent(context, CurrentActivity.class);
        intent.putParcelableExtra(EXTRA_POST, post);
        return intent;
    }

**Fragment**

    public static PostFragment newInstance(Post post) {
        PostFragment fragment = new PostFragment();
        Bundle args = new Bundle();
        args.putParcelable(ARGUMENT_POST, post);
        fragment.setArguments(args)
        return fragment;
    }
    
#### 2.2.20 Line length limit

Code lines should exceed no longer than 100 characters, this makes the code more readable. Sometimes to achieve this, we may need to:

- Extract data to a local variable
- Extract logic to an external method
- Line-wrap code to separate a single line of code to multiple lines

**Note:** For code comments and import statements it’s ok to exceed the 100 character limit.

#### 2.2.20.1 Line-wrapping techniques

When it comes to line-wraps, there’s a few situations where we should be consistent in the way we format code.

**Breaking at Operators**

When we need to break a line at an operator, we break the line before the operator:


    int count = countOne + countTwo - countThree + countFour * countFive - countSix
            + countOnANewLineBecauseItsTooLong;

If desirable, you can always break after the `=` sign:


    int count =
            countOne + countTwo - countThree + countFour * countFive + countSix;

**Method Chaining**

When it comes to method chaining, each method call should be on a new line.

Don’t do this:


    Picasso.with(context).load("someUrl").into(imageView);

Instead, do this:


    Picasso.with(context)
            .load("someUrl")
            .into(imageView);

**Long Parameters**

In the case that a method contains long parameters, we should line break where appropriate. For example when declaring a method we should break after the last comma of the parameter that fits:


    private void someMethod(Context context, String someLongStringName, String text,
                                long thisIsALong, String anotherString) {               
    }             

And when calling that method we should break after the comma of each parameter:


    someMethod(context,
            "thisIsSomeLongTextItsQuiteLongIsntIt",
            "someText",
            01223892365463456,
            "thisIsSomeLongTextItsQuiteLongIsntIt");

#### 2.2.21 Line-wrapping techniques

When it comes to line-wraps, there’s a few situations where we should be consistent in the way we format code.

**Breaking at Operators**

When we need to break a line at an operator, we break the line before the operator:

    int count = countOne + countTwo - countThree + countFour * countFive - countSix
            + countOnANewLineBecauseItsTooLong;

If desirable, you can always break after the `=` sign:

    int count =
            countOne + countTwo - countThree + countFour * countFive + countSix;

**Method Chaining**

When it comes to method chaining, each method call should be on a new line.

Don’t do this:

    Picasso.with(context).load("someUrl").into(imageView);

Instead, do this:

    Picasso.with(context)
            .load("someUrl")
            .into(imageView);

**Long Parameters**

In the case that a method contains long parameters, we should line break where appropriate. For example when declaring a method we should break after the last comma of the parameter that fits:


    private void someMethod(Context context, String someLongStringName, String text,
                                long thisIsALong, String anotherString) {               
    }             

And when calling that method we should break after the comma of each parameter:

    someMethod(context,
            "thisIsSomeLongTextItsQuiteLongIsntIt",
            "someText",
            01223892365463456,
            "thisIsSomeLongTextItsQuiteLongIsntIt");

#### 2.2.22 Method spacing

There only needs to be a single line space between methods in a class, for example:

Do this:


    public String getUserName() {
        // Code
    }

    public void setUserName(String name) {
        // Code
    }

    public boolean isUserSignedIn() {
        // Code
    }

Not this:


    public String getUserName() {
        // Code
    }


    public void setUserName(String name) {
        // Code
    }


    public boolean isUserSignedIn() {
        // Code
    }

#### 2.2.23 Comments

##### 2.2.23.1 Inline comments

Where necessary, inline comments should be used to provide a meaningful description to the reader on what a specific piece of code does. They should only be used in situations where the code may be complex to understand. In most cases however, code should be written in a way that it easy to understand without comments 🙂

**Note:** Code comments do not have to, but should try to, stick to the 100 character rule.

##### 2.2.23.2 JavaDoc style Comments

Whilst a method name should usually be enough to communicate a methods functionality, it can sometimes help to provide JavaDoc style comments. This helps the reader to easily understand the methods functionality, as well as the purpose of any parameters that are being passed into the method.

    /**
     * Authenticates the user against the API given a User id.
     * If successful, this returns a success result
     *
     * @param userId The user id of the user that is to be authenticated.
     */

##### 2.2.23.3 Class comments

When creating class comments they should be meaningful and descriptive, using links where necessary. For example:

    /**
      * RecyclerView adapter to display a list of {@link Post}.
      * Currently used with {@link PostRecycler} to show the list of Post items.
      */

Don’t leave author comments, these aren’t useful and provide no real meaningful information when multiple people are to be working on the class.

    /**
      * Created By Joe 18/06/2016
      */

##### 2.2.23.4 TODO

Use TODO comments for code that is temporary, a short-term solution, or good-enough but not perfect. TODOs should include the string TODO in all caps, followed by a colon:

```// TODO: Remove this code after the UrlTable2 has been checked in.```
and

```// TODO: Change this to use a flag instead of a constant.```
If your TODO is of the form "At a future date do something" make sure that you either include a very specific date ("Fix by November 2005") or a very specific event ("Remove this code after all production mixers understand protocol V7.").

#### 2.2.24. Sectioning code

##### 2.2.24.1 Java code

If creating ‘sections’ for code, this should be done using the following approach, like this:

    public void method() { }

    public void someOtherMethod() { }

    /********* Mvp Method Implementations  ********/

    public void anotherMethod() { }

    /********* Helper Methods  ********/

    public void someMethod() { }

Not like this:

    public void method() { }

    public void someOtherMethod() { }

    // Mvp Method Implementations

    public void anotherMethod() { }

This makes sectioned methods easier to located in a class.

##### 2.2.24.2 Strings file

String resources defined within the string.xml file should be section by feature, for example:


    // User Profile Activity
    <string name="button_save">Save</string>
    <string name="button_cancel">Cancel</string>

    // Settings Activity
    <string name="message_instructions">...</string>

Not only does this help keep the strings file tidy, but it makes it easier to find strings when they need altering.

##### 2.2.24.3 RxJava chains styling

When chaining Rx operations, every operator should be on a new line, breaking the line before the period `.` . For example:

    return dataManager.getPost()
                .concatMap(new Func1<Post, Observable<? extends Post>>() {
                    @Override
                     public Observable<? extends Post> call(Post post) {
                         return mRetrofitService.getPost(post.id);
                     }
                })
                .retry(new Func2<Integer, Throwable, Boolean>() {
                     @Override
                     public Boolean call(Integer numRetries, Throwable throwable) {
                         return throwable instanceof RetrofitError;
                     }
                });

This makes it easier to understand the flow of operation within an Rx chain of calls.

#### 2.2.25 Butterknife

##### 2.2.25.1 Event listeners

Where possible, make use of Butterknife listener bindings. For example, when listening for a click event instead of doing this:

    mSubmitButton.setOnClickListener(new View.OnClickListener() {
        public void onClick(View v) {
            // Some code here...
        }
      };

Do this:

    @OnClick(R.id.button_submit)
    public void onSubmitButtonClick() { }
    
#### 2.2.26 Unused elements

All unused fields, imports, methods and classes should be removed from the code base unless there is any specific reasoning behind keeping it there.

### 2.3 XML style rule

#### 2.3.1 Use self closing tags

When a View in an XML layout does not have any child views, self-closing tags should be used.

Do:

    <ImageView
        android:id="@+id/image_user"
        android:layout_width="90dp"
        android:layout_height="90dp" />

Don’t:

    <ImageView
        android:id="@+id/image_user"
        android:layout_width="90dp"
        android:layout_height="90dp">
    </ImageView>

#### 2.3.2 Resources naming

All resource names and IDs should be written using lowercase and underscores, for example:

    text_username, activity_main, fragment_user, error_message_network_connection

The main reason for this is consistency, it also makes it easier to search for views within layout files when it comes to altering the contents of the file.

#### 2.3.2.1 Id naming

All IDs should be prefixed using the name of the element that they have been declared for.

| Element        | Prefix    |
|----------------|-----------|
| ImageView      | image_    |
| Fragment       | fragment_ |
| RelativeLayout | layout_   |
| Button         | button_   |
| TextView       | text_     |
| View           | view_     |

For example:

    <TextView
        android:id="@+id/text_username"
        android:layout_width="wrap_content"
        android:layout_height="wrap_content" />

Views that typically are only one per layout, such as a toolbar, can simply be given the id of it's view type. E.g.```toolbar```.

#### 2.3.2.2 Strings

All string names should begin with a prefix for the part of the application that they are being referenced from. For example:

| Screen                | String         | Resource Name             |
|-----------------------|----------------|---------------------------|
| Registration Fragment | “Register now” | registration_register_now |
| Sign Up Activity      | “Cancel”       | sign_up_cancel            |
| Rate App Dialog       | “No thanks”    | rate_app_no_thanks        |

If it’s not possible to name the referenced like the above, we can use the following rules:

| Prefix  | Description                                  |
|---------|----------------------------------------------|
| error_  | Used for error messages                      |
| title_  | Used for dialog titles                       |
| action_ | Used for option menu actions                 |
| msg_    | Used for generic message such as in a dialog |
| label_  | Used for activity labels                     |

Two important things to note for String resources:

 - String resources should never be reused across screens. This can cause issues when it comes to changing a string for a specific screen. It saves future complications by having a single string for each screens usage.

 - String resources should **always** be defined in the strings file and never hardcoded in layout or class files.

#### 2.3.2.3 Styles and Themes

When defining both Styles & Themes, they should be named using UpperCamelCase. For example:

    AppTheme.DarkBackground.NoActionBar
    AppTheme.LightBackground.TransparentStatusBar

    ProfileButtonStyle
    TitleTextStyle
    
#### 2.3.3 Attributes ordering

Ordering attributes not only looks tidy but it helps to make it quicker when looking for attributes within layout files. As a general rule,

    1. View Id
    2. Style
    3. Layout width and layout height
    4. Other `layout_` attributes, sorted alphabetically
    5. Remaining attributes, sorted alphabetically

For example:

    <Button
        android:id="@id/button_accept"
        style="@style/ButtonStyle"
        android:layout_width="wrap_content"
        android:layout_height="wrap_content"
        android:layout_alignParentBottom="true"
        android:layout_alignParentStart="true"
        android:padding="16dp"
        android:text="@string/button_skip_sign_in"
        android:textColor="@color/bluish_gray" />

Note: This formatting can be carried out by using the format feature in android studio -

`cmd + shift + L`

Doing this makes it easy to navigate through XML attributes when it comes to making changes to layout files.

### 2.4 Test style rules

#### 2.4.1 Unit tests

Any Unit Test classes should be written to match the name of the class that the test are targeting, followed by the Test suffix. For example:

| Class                | Test Class               |
|----------------------|--------------------------|
| DataManager          | DataManagerTest          |
| UserProfilePresenter | UserProfilePresenterTest |
| PreferencesHelper    | PreferencesHelperTest    |

All Test methods should be annotated with the `@Test` annotation, the methods should be named using the following template:

    @Test
    public void methodNamePreconditionExpectedResult() { }

So for example, if we want to check that the signUp() method with an invalid email address fails, the test would look like:

    @Test
    public void signUpWithInvalidEmailFails() { }

Tests should focus on testing only what the method name entitles, if there’s extra conditions being tested in your Test method then this should be moved to it’s own individual test.

If a class we are testing contains many different methods, then the tests should be split across multiple test classes - this helps to keep the tests more maintainable and easier to locate. For example, a DatabaseHelper class may need to be split into multiple test classes such as :

    DatabaseHelperUserTest
    DatabaseHelperPostsTest
    DatabaseHelperDraftsTest

#### 2.4.2 Espresso tests

Each Espresso test class generally targets an Activity, so the name given to it should match that of the targeted Activity, again followed by Test. For example:

| Class                | Test Class               |
|----------------------|--------------------------|
| MainActivity         | MainActivityTest         |
| ProfileActivity      | ProfileActivityTest      |
| DraftsActivity       | DraftsActivityTest       |

When using the Espresso API, methods should be chained on new lines to make the statements more readable, for example:

    onView(withId(R.id.text_title))
            .perform(scrollTo())
            .check(matches(isDisplayed()))

Chaining calls in this style not only helps us stick to less than 100 characters per line but it also makes it easy to read the chain of events taking place in espresso tests.

## 3. Being consistent

Our parting thought: BE CONSISTENT. If you're edition code, take a few minutes to look at the code around you and determine its style. If they use spaces around if clauses, you should too. If their comments have little boxes of stars around them, make your comments have little boxes of stars around them too.

The point of having style guidelines is to have a common vocabulary of coding, so people can concentrate on what you're saying, rather than on how you're saying it. We present global style rules here so people know the vocabulary. But local style is also important. If code you add to a file looks drastically different from the existing code around it, it throws readers our of their rhythm when they to to read it.

## 4. Best practices:

### 4.1 Storing sensitive data on a local file and not pushing in a git repo 

### 4.2 MVP Architecture

A brief case study for the Model View Presenter (MVP) Architecture while we were developing apps for the Android Platform is described [here] (https://gist.github.com/grishmashrestha/cefe04eeaf74091fb80d66d6c13631b1).

## 5. Sources
- https://lftechnology.atlassian.net/wiki/display/AS/Android+Station
- https://github.com/bufferapp/android-guidelines/blob/master/project_style_guidelines.md
- https://google.github.io/styleguide/javaguide.html
- http://source.android.com/source/code-style.html
- https://github.com/ribot/android-guidelines/blob/master/architecture_guidelines/android_architecture.md
- http://tools.android.com/tech-docs/new-build-system/user-guide
- https://developer.android.com/studio/projects/index.html
